---
layout: post
title: "Why should we care about statistics?"
date: 2025-11-01
categories: SCIENCE
---

"We are imperfect creatures living in an uncertain world" wrote Nate Silvers in his bestselling book "The Signal and the Noise". 

This sentence, to me, captures well how scary or impossible trying to gain truth sometimes feels. Information is accumulating at an unprecedented rate, yet gaining knowledge does not feel easier. To face the 2.5 quintillion bytes accumulating _daily_ (https://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/data/sw-library/data/IBM_Smarter_Computing_BIG_DATA.pdf), we seem but poorly equipped with brains that excel at associative thinking, storytelling, and pattern recognition, but that struggle with statistical reasoning (Kahneman, D. (2012). _Schnelles denken, langsames Denken_. Siedler Verlag.).

Knowing that statistics exists, often helps me not to lose my head in the face of complexity and uncertainty. It offers a way to engage with uncertainty without denying it, and even to see it as a chance.

Many questions that matter—scientifically, politically, or personally—are statistical at their core. How effective is a new drug? Which genotypes are most resistant to variable weather conditions? Which health insurance should I choose? If everyone ate like I do, how much land would we need for food production?

At this point, a common objection arises: _“But can we trust statistics?”_  
People often quote sayings such as “Do not trust any statistics you did not fake yourself” (frequently, but likely falsely, attributed to Churchill, also “There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics.”) Add to this the concept of GIGO—_garbage in, garbage out_—which reminds us that poor data cannot produce reliable conclusions. Also remember the replication crisis in medicine. This skepticism is reflected in the fact that for a long time one of the most famous books about statistics was _How to Lie with Statistics_ by Darrell Huff (https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/13565/how-to-lie-with-statistics-by-darrell-huff-with-pictures-by-mel-calman/9780140136296). Huff, not a statistician by training, documented many ways in which statistics can be manipulated: misleading averages, small samples, cherry-picked data, and distorted visualizations. The book sold millions of copies worldwide and shaped public perception of statistics for decades.

However, my reading of Huff’s message is not that statistics should be rejected altogether, but that it should be handled with care—both when producing it and when consuming it, much like any other form of information. Also, I think Huff fell victim to one of the fallacies he wrote about. Closely aligned with the tobacco industry, he was fighting the belief that smoking caused lung cancer. (for more info: [https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1740-9713.2014.00765.x](https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1740-9713.2014.00765.x). Nowadays, the fact that smoking and lung cancer are correlated and causally related is barely contested. So - 1:0 for the information gain, no?

And there are may other examples, where statistics helped to get a scientific consensus view or good example to gain knowlegde. A personall (biased) shortlisted hall of fame

1. Climate Change detection and attribution (IPCC)
2. Epidemological monitoring (COVID-19)
3. The whole work of ourworldindata - publishing open-source data, visualise and interpret them to gain an as-holistic as possible yet broken down enough to digest view of the world: https://ourworldindata.org
4. Identifying smoking as a cause of cancer
5. 

Today, I am glad that many newer books on statistics take a more balanced and constructive approach, highlighting not only the pitfalls but also the power of statistical thinking. Examples include _The Signal and the Noise_, _How to Make the World Add Up_, _The Art of Statistics_, and _Strength in Numbers_ (see my bookshelf).

So let us not avoid statistics, but try to be as meticulous as possible. Yes, is still easy to lie with statistics, but it is even easier to lie without them (Frederick Mosteller maybe)